[MUSIC PLAYING]
Many, many people will
say I'm in a dark night,
and they have no idea
they're referring
to a mystical journey.
But the dark night of
the soul is, in fact,
a archetypal, mystical journey.
It was outlined in
the 16th century
by a Spanish Carmelite priest
named John of the Cross.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> So John of the Cross
described his mystical odyssey
as he lay in a dark and putrid
cell sometime around the year
1577.
Ordained a Carmelite
priest in 1567,
Juan de Yepes y
Alvarez vowed himself
to the strict rule
of the Carmelites.
Distraught over what he and
his spiritual companion Saint
Teresa of Avila felt
was the contamination
of their divine order of the
Carmelites, the two of them
set off under what they
felt was divine instruction
for the reformation
of the Carmelites.
This led to his
imprisonment and torture
in this damp and dirty
narrow cell with only God
as his companion.
Now, you might think a
priest would feel justified
and comforted knowing
he was doing God's work
no matter what the circumstances
brought, but he did not.
He was a very little man.
He was very cold.
He was bleeding, he was
battered, and he was all alone.
And Juan de la Cruz felt
humiliated and confused.
And this is where
perhaps so many of us
would relate to
John of the Cross.
When we feel like
we've been guided
and things seem to
go bad, we wonder,
why has God forsaken us,
and that's what he wondered.
His suffering was intense,
and he found himself
deep in that first stage
of his spiritual journey
that he came to
call the dark night
of the soul and the first
stage that he identified
as the night of the senses.
Now, John of the
Cross was not somebody
who I would think was very
popular with so many people.
But his journey has
become so well known.
What I hear from people all the
time is, I'm in a dark night,
this is a dark night, but they
have no idea that that phrase,
that that inner experience
that they're describing,
in fact, originated
with a Spanish priest
from the 16th century, that, in
fact, what they're describing
is a profound mystical journey.
So I just want to hit a pause
button here, which is my habit,
and give you a bit of
a larger perspective
before we jump back
in and I describe
in detail the dark
night of the soul
because I'll bet you
that some part of you
relates to this intimately.
Quite a few years ago,
I observed something.
As all of you know, one of
the epidemics of our time
is depression, is
inner suffering.
There's never been a time
in human society like now
where there has been
so much suffering
in the world behind our eye
as much as the world in front
of our eye, that we now are
in so much medical support,
therapeutic support
for our inner space
as much as for our outer space.
We are becoming very
psychically porous.
And so much of the depression
we see now in our society
is what I call a
spiritual crisis, not
a psychological
one, not one that we
need to medicate in the
hope of eradicating it
from our personal world.
Rather, a spiritual crisis
is a profound journey
of transformation that
we need to embrace
regardless of the
suffering it may cause us.
Now, I recognize
spiritual crises,
but that's not language
that a lot of people use.
It's what falls under the
title of holy language for me.
I'm not accustomed
to people saying,
I'm in a spiritual crisis.
Hopefully, in the
near future, that
will be something people
recognize, but it's not.
And so several years
ago, I recognized
that this is true, that, in
fact, the mystical experiences
that these great
mystics wrote about
had adapted to modern times,
that the dark night of the soul
had adapted itself to who
we are, to our modern times.
We, however, don't
speak mysticism.
We don't recognize
a mystical crisis.
a spiritual crisis.
We don't call it that.
So our tendency is to
go to a therapist, is
to think that something is
wrong, unaware that, in fact,
what's happening is really a
deep and profound spiritual
crisis or a spiritual
transformation.
Now, archetypally
speaking, the difference
between a spiritual crisis
and a psychological one,
first of all, in general--
let me just say, before I take
you deep into the dark night
because it's fair for you to
say, as I always say to people,
if you were sitting with me now,
a logical question would be,
why do I need to
know about this?
Because spiritual crises
are now happening, as far as
I'm concerned, more
than psychological ones.
They look the same.
They often present the same.
But a spiritual crisis has a
very different agenda with you.
It has, in fact, an agenda.
It is a conscious crisis.
Can you imagine?
But it is.
A spiritual crisis is conscious,
whereas a psychological crisis
is not.
It's not.
But a spiritual
crisis of the soul
has purpose and intent, as I'll
describe to you when I'll take
it apart as the dark night.
Now, the thing is they
present the same way.
In other words, the
depression is there.
The sense of despair is there.
The sense of confusion,
anxiety, all of that
can present in your
life the exact same way.
The difference between
a psychological
and a spiritual crisis is
that the spiritual crisis
has almost like this
little jewel of grace
inside that indicates there's
a reason for this suffering.
It's not without meaning.
So I'm going to take you into
the dark night of the soul,
and I want to describe it
to you as John of the Cross
talked about it because
it's, I believe,
so important for the
contemporary person
to understand this.
This is a crisis that
has emerged or erupted
into modernity because
we are confronting
a new template of
what's possible
and what is impossible, what
we think the nature of God is.
So let me take you in.
Now, many times people have
said to me, I'm in a dark night,
and they'll describe that they
are going through a divorce
or they're having an
emotionally difficult
time in a relationship or--
does that qualify
as a dark night?
And I'm going to
say, no, it doesn't.
A dark night of the soul is
an entire archetypal journey,
and it has an agenda,
and it has a path.
And the purpose of the dark
night is to break you down
and then to change
the relationship you
have with your understanding
of how the divine works
in your life, how the nature
of the invisible world
works in your life specifically.
I don't care what
your background is.
your tradition is.
It doesn't matter because
this is archetypal.
Every single person starts
out with their relationship
with the non-physical
world, with this idea
that there is a way to reason
with the non-physical world,
and that there are logical
reasons for why things happen
as they do, that there is a way
that we can behave that we can
form a kind of
parent-child relationship
with God in such a way
that if we are good,
bad things won't happen to
us, and that if we receive
guidance, that somehow, if
we follow that guidance,
that we will be
protected from bad things
or rewarded if we struggle.
I have had conversations
with people
who have been in accidents,
and they've gotten out
of these accidents, and
they've made remarks like,
honestly, I must be
something special,
I must have been saved
for a special reason,
or I was meant to do something
special because this bad thing
happened, as if specialness
is the counter-product
to difficulty or that
the sign that you've
made the right decision
in your guidance
is supposed to be that
everything went smoothly.
I know it was the right decision
because right after I did that,
boy, everything went easily as
if, should it not go easily,
then you want to sit back
and say, well, excuse me,
but I did everything just
like you guided me to,
so explain yourself.
Now, that's how
human beings reason.
So the first night,
the first stage
of the dark night of the
soul, the night of the senses
is a confrontation
with exactly that kind
of reason, which is why going
back to the beginning of this,
John of the Cross felt that
he was following guidance when
he was working with
Teresa of Avila
to challenge the
Carmelite community.
None of that makes
any difference to you.
The only part that
matters is that he
felt like we often feel, that
we are following guidance.
And it seemed to backfire.
Now, apply this to your life,
how many times you might follow
what you believe is guidance
or how many times you feel
like you've followed your
inner instruction only to feel
like this is very difficult, I
must have done something wrong,
because the way you look
for validation as to whether
or not you've done the right
thing is because you expect--
and here's the operative word--
you expect things to be easy as
a result. You expect fairness--
word number two.
You expect justice--
word number three.
You expect heaven to somehow
have the wind at your back
because you've
followed guidance.
This is the way a
child sees heaven.
And what John
suddenly realized was
that at the first level
of the dark night,
as he was being beaten
by his Carmelites.
His first response was, how
could this happen to me?
I've only done something
good, and this is not working.
And it tests our metal.
And he realized, as in
the center of this abuse,
that he had a choice, that he
could become very resentful
or he could change how he
understood the nature of God.
He must have had a very immature
idea of God that, in fact,
the idea of God was based
on making everything
go right for him
in the world, which
it so often is for people.
Unless everything is reasonable,
unless everything is fair,
then there is no
such thing as God.
There is no such thing as God.
It's just a man-made thing.
And on that night during
those experiences,
during that experience of abuse,
what he realized at a deeper
level-- and I hope I
can communicate this--
is that the deeper choice was
life is not about fairness
but how we respond in
the midst of unfairness.
Life is not about reason but how
we navigate the unreasonable.
The journey of our
soul is how cleverly
we maneuver through
the unreasonable.
How is it possible
that we can choose
to be loving in the
midst of cruelty,
to be forgiving in
the midst of insanity?
And somehow he realized that
that was the great choice
of the divine being.
And he wrote, "On that
glad night, in secret--"
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> "--when no one saw me--"
>> "--deep in the place
where only we could be."
John of the Cross chose love.
He confronted his
reasonable self
and gave up his ego
demands, and he realized,
I'm going to choose love
in the midst of insanity,
in the midst of cruelty.
I will, quote, "turn
the other cheek,"
not because I'm ordered to,
but because it's the only thing
that makes sense.
And what doesn't make sense
will make sense out of this--
the mystical paradox.
In that instant,
grace stepped in,
and his conflict was resolved.
He no longer felt God
had abandoned him,
and the second phase of the
dark night of the soul began.
The night of the spirit
is the second phase
of the dark night of the soul.
During the night
of the senses, we
confront the breakdown
of the myths of the God
we want, the God of personal
justice and favoritism,
when we finally accept
that God did not
create this world for us
but us for this world.
Then we go from our
breakdown to our breakthrough
in the night of the senses.
It is during this deep
mystical unfolding
that we discover how we have
limited our capacity to love,
how we have withheld
compassion, how and why we
have judged others.
During this remarkable journey,
those scales fall off our eyes,
and what is left is only
our openness to love.
John of the Cross's deep
experience of mystical love
was initiated in prison.
He eventually escaped with
the help of a fellow Carmelite
and was canonized Saint
John of the Cross in 1726.
A beautiful example
in our modern times
of a person responding from
this deep place of mystical love
after a devastating
event in their life
comes from the Dalai Lama.
When a reporter said
to the Dalai Lama
after this slaughter of
one third of the monks
in Tibet, what do
you think about this,
he was hoping to provoke
from the Dalai Lama.
But he said, I think
compassion, compassion.
The Dalai Lama was coming
from the night of the spirit,
the second stage.
Now, you hold onto me here.
We need the dark
night of the soul.
What we need is
that we desperately
need the experience of
cosmic disappointment.
We absolutely need to confront
why we so desperately want life
to be reasonable and
fair, to want life
to be what it can
never, ever, ever be
and why we keep insisting
that life is like that.
We must confront in us why
we become so angry at people
who we feel let us down.
When they do something, we
think, you're so unfair,
this is so not right, that we
cannot get over that things
that just--
that should not happen
to us because we
think we're so special, that
unfair things that we think,
it's OK if they happen to
others, but not to us, by God,
not to us.
We need to have that part
of ourselves confronted.
Because at the root
of it is this reason--
we are terrified to
love without boundaries,
to really love deeply, to
love without restrictions.
We are terrified to actually
hear guidance in us that
instructs us to care for
those that our mind would say,
stay away from those
people, but our heart
would say, go to them.
We are terrified of the
depth of our own humanity.
We're actually
terrified of that.
And it is only our
need for reason
that allows us to control the
size and depth of our humanity.
It's only our
capacity to stay angry
at life that allows us
to control how much we'll
allow ourself to love,
and that, in fact,
if we became mystically,
unreasonably, unreasonable,
wildly open to
the power of love,
we would not be able to control
our response to strangers.
We would feel them.
We would no longer
be inclined to judge.
We would no longer be inclined
to put up the boundaries that
so easily come up in us.
And it's so funny.
Just as we're entering the
age of the global community,
we're entering the age of the
global dark night of the soul.
So I'm sure if you
were sitting with me,
you would say, what do I do?
How do I know if
I'm in a dark night?
How do I know?
What do I do when it strikes?
What if it comes upon me?
It could strike at the
happiest day of my life.
Yes, it could.
It's not necessarily triggered
by a divorce or a bad day.
The dark night can strike
you as sure as you are just
walking down the street on
the loveliest day of the year
because it is an archetypal
spiritual transformation,
and it hits when the
time is right for you
to begin this journey, for
you to begin this journey.
And so my counsel to
you, my counsel to you,
is that the symptoms of
the dark night are these--
you have to sit down
deeply with yourself
and ask yourself first, is
this a psychological crisis,
or am I in a spiritual one?
Am I in a battle with God?
And in my heart, I am
terrified of my own survival,
and that terrifies
me spiritually.
And you ask yourself
that question.
Ask yourself deeply
if, at the root,
you feel like life
is not following
my logical conclusions,
my logical order,
that I am, in fact, terrified
that the choices I make
don't play out.
And I need to change
me in order to proceed.
I can't change anything else.
It's me that has to change.
And the parts of me that
have to change are so deep.
It's not about
changing an attitude.
It's about changing a
relationship with how I
fundamentally see the universe.
That is where you begin with
looking at the dark night.
And as you proceed with
that, turn your attention
to grace, because
in the dark night,
as you proceed to the
second stage, which
is the night of your spirit,
and you think, is this worth it,
what you learn, what you
discover about yourself
is that you have hidden in
you an extraordinary capacity
to transform the lives
of other people--
not influence them,
transform them.
Transform means
to inspire people
to become better human beings.
Influence means control.
Inspire comes from grace.
You have an enormous capacity
to use the graces inside of you
to become a channel for grace.
That's the power of
your spirit, and that's
what I call becoming
spiritually, mystically
unreasonable to do things that
only makes sense to your soul.
That's what happens when you
let love go and run through you
like the force it's meant to.
Now, let me add something
about the dark night that's
really important to understand.
It is both a personal journey
and an impersonal journey.
It is about you understanding or
recognizing or being introduced
to your sacred design.
Shall I say the secret power,
a hidden resource in you?
We don't get to that part of
ourselves without a struggle.
We just don't.
All the treasures of life
are never easily accessed,
and that's just the way it is.
It's worth the dark night
to let yourself become
a mystic without a monastery.
The dark night is a fight
to the finish, a bending
until there is a breakthrough.
And like the addict that
is broken and retrieved
through treatment, brighter
days, I promise you,
are in the end for the travelers
through the dark night.
And all the while, your
spirit speaks to you,
believe me, even through
the most difficult of times.
Thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]